---
title: 'Navigating the Intersection of Science and Policy: A Review of Mark E. Rushefsky’s Insights on Governmental Misuse of Scientific Data'
date: 2024-05-06
permalink: /posts/2012/08/blog-post-13/
tags:
  - Defense Companies
  - Defense Industry
  - Economics of Defense
---

In todays world of governing the interaction, between science and public policy stands out as a battleground where environmental and public health concerns take stage. Mark E. Rushefskys insightful piece, “The Misuse of Science in Government Decision Making “ explores this arena focusing on the Reagan administration era — a time when efforts were made to reduce the perceived burdens on industry. Rushefskys comprehensive examination reveals how scientific information can be distorted to serve interests jeopardizing the fundamental principles of scientific integrity and the reliability of governmental decisions.

The story unfolds during the 1960s and 1970s a period characterized by growing awareness of risks and workplace dangers leading to significant legislative actions aimed at addressing these hazards. The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) played a role, in implementing regulations that often sparked public and political discussions. Within these debates scientific data was frequently utilized by parties to support their differing viewpoints intensifying the landscape of public policy.

Rushefsky highlights two approaches through which scientific information is manipulated to influence policy results.
The initial approach entails organizing the data collection procedure to ensure a predetermined outcome often coordinating with experts who have economic agendas. The alternative straightforward method involves distorting information — either by manipulating data itself or, by presenting it in a way that aims to deceive or mislead decision making processes.

These tactics are clearly demonstrated through real life examples in Rushefskys research. For instance when dealing with the regulation of formaldehyde the EPAs decision making was significantly influenced by industry sway, marked by data collection and private meetings that skewed the assessments. Another instance can be seen in discussions about wetlands restoration following mining in Osceola National Forest, where scientific evaluations were altered to support industry arguments suggesting that new technologies could mitigate impacts — despite evidence to the contrary.

The consequences of manipulation are significant as they not undermine the credibility of the scientific process but also weaken the validity of policies based on manipulated data. To combat these practices Rushefsky suggests corrective actions. He calls for peer review processes and transparent critiques involving perspectives, on contentious matters.
He also suggests strengthening the review processes within agencies and increasing oversight, from entities such as Congress, the courts and the media. Additionally he recommends that agencies prioritize using data and implement protective measures for whistleblowers who uncover unethical handling of such data.

To sum up Rushefsky asserts that the misapplication of science in government decisions can greatly affect trust and the quality of policies related to health, safety and the environment. He stresses the importance of transparency, regulations and upholding integrity for effective policymaking. His analysis highlights the need for a renewed focus on these principles in a time where pressures, from interests persist.
