---
title: "Defense Innovation and Strategic Autonomy in Eastern Europe: Socio-Technical Imaginaries and Security Narratives in Poland, Ukraine, and the Czech Republic"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2024-02-17-paper-title-number-8
excerpt: 'defence innovation, STS, socio-technical imaginaries, strategic autonomy, europe'
date: 2025-06-02
venue: 'To be published'
paperurl: 'http://academicpages.github.io/files/paper3.pdf'
citation: 'Mumin Ahmedoglu. (2024). &quot;Defense Innovation and Strategic Autonomy in Eastern Europe: Socio-Technical Imaginaries and Security Narratives in Poland, Ukraine, and the Czech Republic.&quot; <i> - </i>.'
---

Eastern European nations aim to reshape their defense strategies through their socio-technical imaginaries, which are the collective visions where science and technology secure national autonomy. This journey involves the challenge of achieving strategic autonomy while navigating dependencies on major powers and allies (ie. NATO and the EU). This paper examines how Poland, Ukraine, and the Czech Republic deal with this challenge. Poland focuses on foreign procurement and selective local production to sustain large-scale military modernization. Ukraine rapidly adapts commercial and dual-use technologies through a locally developed decentralized military innovation ecosystem. The Czech Republic implemented a structured policy-driven approach to defense innovation. How each of them came up with their unique and different approach is the question of this study. While they all seek to reduce external dependencies and strengthen their own defense capabilities, each of them followed a different approach. This approach can be analyzed through a deep examination of their historical experiences, security imperatives, and alliance structures. A case study of Czechia’s drone innovation is examined to understand the narratives before and after 2022. The findings suggest that socio-technical imaginaries actually shape defense innovation in these countries by linking their national security to technological sovereignty. This explains how they conceptualize their military future and shows their different approaches yield to different defense strategies. Poland relies on strengthening its NATO alignment and rapid procurement of foreign systems. Ukraine fosters a grassroots-driven imaginary of technology resilience and self-reliance as a result of the war with Russia. The Czech Republic envisions a security future where integration into European defense frameworks assists their defense autonomy goal, balancing national capabilities with alliance commitments.
